BACK TO  CONTENTS
Richard Seefeldt, EdD 
University of Wisconsin–River Falls
Teacher Reviewers 
Nancy Diehl, PhD, Hong Kong International School,  
Tai Tam, Hong Kong, and R. Scott Reed, MEd,  
Hamilton High School, Chandler, AZ
Developed and Produced by the Teachers of Psychology in Secondary Schools 
(TOPSS) of the American Psychological Association, September 2014
PSYCHOLOGICAL  
DISORDERS
A Unit Lesson Plan for  
High School Psychology Teachers
ii
PSYCHOLOGiCAL DiSORDERS
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 
A Unit Lesson Plan for High School Psychology Teachers
This unit is aligned to the following content and performance standards of the National Standards for High 
School Psychology Curricula (APA, 2011):
DOMAiN: iNDiViDUAL VARiATiON 
STANDARD AREA: PSYCHOLOGiCAL DiSORDERS
CONTENT STANDARDS
After concluding this unit, students understand: 
1. Perspectives on abnormal behavior 
2. Categories of psychological disorders
CONTENT STANDARDS WiTH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
CONTENT STANDARD 1: Perspectives on abnormal behavior 
Students are able to (performance standards): 
1.1 Define psychologically abnormal behavior 
1.2 Describe historical and cross-cultural views of abnormality 
1.3 Describe major models of abnormality 
1.4 Discuss how stigma relates to abnormal behavior 
1.5 Discuss the impact of psychological disorders on the individual, family, and society
CONTENT STANDARD 2: Categories of psychological disorders 
Students are able to (performance standards): 
2.1 Describe the classification of psychological disorders 
2.2 Discuss the challenges associated with diagnosis 
2.3 Describe symptoms and causes of major categories of psychological disorders (including schizophrenic, 
mood, anxiety, and personality disorders) 
2.4 Evaluate how different factors influence an individual’s experience of psychological disorders
DOMAiN: APPLiCATiONS OF PSYCHOLOGiCAL SCiENCE 
STANDARD AREA: TREATMENT OF PSYCHOLOGiCAL DiSORDERS
CONTENT STANDARD
After concluding this unit, students understand: 
Perspectives on treatment
CONTENT STANDARDS WiTH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
CONTENT STANDARD 1: Perspectives on treatment 
Students are able to (performance standards): 
1.1 Explain how psychological treatments have changed over time and among cultures 
1.2 Match methods of treatment to psychological perspectives
TOPSS thanks Christie P. Karpiak, PhD, of The University of Scranton and Jyh-Hann Chang, PhD, of East  
Stroudsburg University for their reviews of this unit plan.
This project was supported by a grant from the American Psychological Foundation.
Copyright (C) 2014 American Psychological Association.
iii
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
 
iNTRODUCTiON 
V
 
 
PROCEDURAL TiMELiNE 
1
 
CONTENT OUTLiNE 
3
 
ACTiViTiES 
31
 
CRiTiCAL THiNKiNG AND DiSCUSSiON QUESTiONS 
43
 
REFERENCES 
 
AND OTHER RESOURCES 
47
 
CONTENTS
V
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
I
t is common to find students new to psychology who believe the study  
of psychological disorders is psychology. These students are often 
disappointed to find out that it is only a small piece of what psychologists 
study and that they usually have to wait until the very end of the class to 
begin studying it. 
Moreover, once they get to this unit, students bring with them precon-
ceived notions regarding psychological disorders. More and more, these 
notions have been shaped by a student’s own experience. Most all stu-
dents know at least one person whose problem has been classified as a 
mental disorder and who is taking some sort of psychotropic medication to 
change the problem. Television advertisements, shows, their doctors, and 
other people they know have provided them with a lot of information, and 
for the most part they tend to believe what they have been told. 
Unfortunately, much of what students have learned from these sources is 
not scientifically accurate. For example, most students believe “having a 
mental disorder” is a clear-cut thing. They believe you are either someone 
who “has one,” or you are someone who “doesn’t have one.” They also 
tend to believe that explaining psychological disorders is far simpler than 
explaining any other kind of behavior. For example, they find it easy to ac-
cept it is impossible for us to determine with absolute certainty why some-
one would play basketball, but at the same time believe when someone 
acts depressed it is simply because of some neurochemical imbalance.
The facts of the matter are that people’s problems are typically not cate-
gorical, but dimensional. People experience problems more or less over 
the duration of their lives. Sometimes and in some situations these prob-
lems interfere more than at other times and situations. Sometimes these 
problems get classified as “mental disorders,” and sometimes they don’t. In 
addition, the reasons why people experience problems are highly complex. 
Indeed, psychological disorders are at least as complex as why people ex-
perience or do anything else. It is important for students to understand the 
complexity of psychological disorders. There are many biological, psycho-
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
Vi
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
logical, and sociocultural factors involved in the development of psycholog-
ical disorders. Understanding these different factors and their complexities 
is just as (if not more) important than memorizing the categorical names 
(diagnoses) of different problems. For this reason, it is important to empha-
size the different models of abnormality and to avoid oversimplifying the 
complex nature of human problems. 
The following Content Outline provides an overview of the history of  
understanding psychological disorders, followed by a summary of the  
major theoretical models used to explain them. The final section is a  
sampling of the major categorical descriptions of psychological disorders 
from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth  
Edition) (DSM-5) and the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth 
Revision (ICD-9-CM).
1
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL  
TIMELINE
LESSON 1: INTRODUCTION AND HISTORY
Activity 1: What is Abnormal Behavior?
LESSON 2: CURRENT PERSPECTIVES
Activity 2.1:  Psychological Disorders and  
Perspectives in Psychology
Activity 2.2: On Being Sane in insane Places
LESSON 3:  CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL  
DISORDERS
LESSON 4: PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
Activity 4: An Assignment With Vignettes
LESSON 5: PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS, CONTINUED
Activity 5.1: Connecting Media and Psychology 
Activity 5.2: interesting Psychology information
PROCEDURAL TIMELINE
3
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
LESSON 1
introduction and History
i. General 
“Psychologically abnormal behavior” has been described as many things 
over the course of history including madness, insanity, craziness, lunacy, 
mental disorders, mental illnesses, psychopathology, maladjustment, be-
havioral disturbances, emotional disturbances, personal problems, etc. All 
of these descriptions are colored by the culture in which they arise and by 
the particular ideas people have for why people exhibit these problems. 
There are at least as many definitions of psychological abnormality as 
there have been names for it. Because behaviors, emotions, cognitions, 
and adaptation are best described dimensionally, and because psycho-
logical abnormality is defined in most cases by these processes, it is very 
difficult to have a definition we can apply absolutely. It should come as no 
surprise, then, that there are no universally accepted definitions of psycho-
logical abnormality.
A.  Comer (2014) states that most current definitions of abnormality 
include the ideas of deviance, distress, dysfunction, and danger-
ousness. 
B.  Rosenhan & Seligman (1995) also include ideas of observer dis-
comfort, irrationality (to others), and violation of ideal standards. 
C.  The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual (DSM-5) describes some specific abnormal psy-
chiatric conditions and defines these “mental disorders” as “… 
syndrome[s] characterized by clinically significant disturbance[s] 
in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that 
CONTENT OUTLINE
CONTENT OUTLINE
4
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
reflects a dysfunction in psychological, biological, or developmen-
tal processes underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are 
usually associated with significant distress or disability in social, 
occupational, or other important activities. An expectable or cul-
turally approved response to a common stressor or loss, such as 
the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder. Socially devi-
ant behavior (e.g. political, religious, or sexual) and conflicts that 
are primarily between the individual and society are not mental 
disorders unless the deviance or conflict results from a dysfunc-
tion in the individual, as described above” (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013, p. 20).
ii. Historical views of abnormality
A.  Ancient times  
 
Supernatural causes 
 
The primary explanation for psychological disturbances in  
ancient times seems to have been supernatural causes. Egyptian, 
Chinese, and Hebrew writings all describe psychological distur-
bances as being caused by demons, and some of the earliest 
known treatments for the disorders were exorcisms, starvation, 
and maybe even trephination (Comer, 2014; Maher & Maher, 1985; 
Porter, 2003). Early explanations of abnormality in Indian, Chinese, 
and Egyptian cultures all refer to some sort of supernatural causes, 
along with imbalances in some sort of bodily fluids or forces.
B.  Greece and Rome (500 BC to 500 AD) 
 
Imbalances 
 
Though Greeks such as Socrates and Homer were not immune 
from citing “the gods” as a potential source of madness, Hippo-
crates (460-377 BC) taught that illnesses had natural causes and 
that abnormality was the result of some sort of disease process 
resulting from imbalances of the four humours: black bile, yellow 
bile, blood, and phlegm (Porter, 2003).
C. Middle Ages (500 AD to 1350)
1.  Europe 
 
Supernatural explanations for problems again became very 
popular across Europe. This popularity was accompanied by 
a return to exorcisms and witch hunting as methods of elimi-
nating problems. Dominican monks by the names of Kramer 
and Sprenger published the Malleus Maleficarum in 1486 (see 
5
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Mackay, 2009) as a sort of manual describing in dramatic detail 
the methods of identifying, examining, trying, and “treating” 
witches.
2.  Middle East 
 
The first hospital ward to treat madness was founded in Bagh-
dad in the year 705. Some of the treatments at this hospital an-
ticipated the development of “moral therapy” in Europe some 
1,100 years later. In 1025, a Persian by the name of Ibn-Sina 
(Avicenna) completed a five-book encyclopedia of medicine 
known as The Canon of Medicine that takes a scientific ap-
proach to disease and whose descriptions and treatments of 
abnormality include but go far beyond the humoral explana-
tions. This document has been cited as one of the most influ-
ential in the history of science (Sarton, 1952). 
D. Renaissance (1400–1700)
1.  Scientific thinking 
 
Throughout Europe, scientific thinking gained momentum over 
supernatural explanations. Johannes Weyer (1515-1588) pub-
lished a rebuttal to the Malleus Maleficarum and supernatural 
explanations of abnormality that makes the case that abnor-
malities might be considered diseases with natural causes. 
Because some of his work refuted supernatural causes, the 
church banned the book for centuries.
2.  Development of asylums  
 
Asylums, designed to house the “mad,” began to develop 
across Europe. One of the earliest of these was St. Mary of 
Bethlehem (“Bethlem” or “Bedlam”) in London. Bethlem is 
known to have housed people considered “mad” since the late 
14th century. During that time, the ability to reason was the 
one faculty believed to differentiate people from other animals. 
Because people who were “mad” were considered to have 
lost their ability to reason, they were considered to be less 
than human and more like animals. Thus, institutions during 
these times were largely places that “maintained” patients by 
holding them away from the larger community. When attempts 
were made to actually treat people, the treatments were limited 
mostly to those focused on humoural imbalances (bleeding, 
purging, etc.). Patients were often chained in rooms and oth-
erwise treated inhumanely (Andrews, Briggs, Porter, Tucker, & 
Waddington, 1997).
6
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
 E. Late 18th century–mid-19th century
1.  Moral therapy 
 
Philippe Pinel is credited with developing what he called “trait-
ement morale.” This idea was actually developed by one of 
Bicetre’s former scrofula patients turned superintendent—
Jean-Baptiste Pussin. The idea was essentially a switch from 
treating people like animals in chains to releasing them from 
their chains and treating them humanely and with respect. 
Pussin and Pinel first implemented this treatment at La Bice-
tre in Paris in 1793 and soon after instituted the change at the 
even larger La Salpetriere hospital for women also in Paris 
(Porter, 2003).
2.  Moral therapy applied to asylums 
 
William Tuke is credited with establishing one of the first insti-
tutions based on the idea of moral therapy in York, England, in 
1796. This institution, called The Retreat and commonly known 
as the “York Retreat,” was built to be very much like a large 
Quaker home where patients would be treated with a combina-
tion of rest, talk, prayer, and manual work (Tuke, 1964).
3.  Spread of moral therapy 
 
This sort of treatment spread throughout Europe and the 
United States, with many institutions developing along the 
lines of the York Retreat and moral therapy. Benjamin Rush 
(1745-1813) and Dorothea Dix (1802-1887) are two Americans 
known for the establishment of institutions (Rush) and the de-
velopment of laws and reforms (Dix) in line with the notions of 
moral therapy.
F. Mid-19th century–early 20th century
1.  Continued growth of mental hospitals  
 
Institutions for people exhibiting psychological abnormalities 
became increasingly large and increasingly unable to take 
good care of the people housed in them. The ideals of moral 
therapy gave way to the practicalities of treating large numbers 
of people in large institutions with relatively small numbers of 
staff. Once again individuals were not so much treated in these 
large “hospitals” as they were maintained (Scull, 1993).
2. Medical breakthroughs 
(a)  New discoveries made in France and Germany linking 
syphilis to the development of general paresis (a devas-
7
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
tating brain disease that was quite prevalent and con-
sidered a form of madness until the early 20th century) 
led the way to a resurgence for the idea that biological 
factors played an important role in the development of 
psychological abnormalities. 
(b)  The development of arsphenamine and later penicillin in 
the treatment of syphilis drastically reduced the numbers 
of individuals developing general paresis. This success 
paved the way for other biological treatments of abnor-
malities, including removal of body parts (Cotton, 1921), 
insulin shock therapy (Sakel, 1927; see Shorter, 1997), 
electric convulsive therapy (Cerletti, 1956), and lobot-
omy (Moniz, 1935; see Tierney, 2000) and prescribing 
of chemicals like chlorpromazine (Laborit, 1949; see 
Swazey, 1974).
3.  Psychological advances  
 
Meanwhile in psychology, progress was being made in under-
standing all behavior, including abnormality. Individuals such 
as Freud (1933, psychoanalysis), Pavlov (1927, respondent 
conditioning), Skinner (1938, operant conditioning), Kelly 
(1955, role of cognition), Binswanger (1963, existentialism), 
Frankl (1958, role of meaning), and Rogers (1951, humanistic 
therapy) laid the foundations for modern psychological expla-
nations of abnormality.
G.  Mid-20th century–present 
 
Developments continued in biomedical and psychological under-
standing and treatment of abnormality. 
1. Biomedical advances 
(a)  Biological research to explain abnormality lagged far 
behind the use of biological treatments to treat it. 
(b)  Biological treatments continued to evolve largely through 
serendipitous discoveries of how medications (developed 
for altogether different purposes) seemed to affect be-
havior, affect, and cognition. Thus, in addition to treating 
problems like schizophrenia, drugs were developed to 
treat problems like mood disorders (tricyclic antidepres-
sants for depression and lithium for bipolarity), anxiety 
disorders (benzodiazepines), and even childhood disor-
ders like attention-deficit hyperactivity (methylphenidate). 
8
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
(c)  Though these treatments are popular today, the expla-
nations for why these medications often work (and often 
don’t work!) are still lacking. 
(d)  Technological advances in assessing brain structures 
and functions (e.g., EEG, PET, fMRI) have led to a  
better understanding of some of the brain correlates  
of abnormality. 
2.  Psychological advances 
 
The psychological theories and therapies developed in the 
late 19th and early 20th centuries have continued to evolve 
with research to the present day. One major advance in the 
last half-century has been the connection of the cognitive and 
behavioral approaches to problems. This theoretical connec-
tion was made by psychologists such as Bandura (via social 
learning and social–cognitive theories), Rotter, and Mischel. 
In addition to those individuals, people such as Beck and Ellis 
were early leaders in developing treatments consistent with 
these ideas. 
3.  Advances in psychotherapies  
 
In general, psychotherapies continued to evolve during the last 
half of the 20th century and continue to evolve to the present. 
Eysenck’s (1952) landmark study of the ineffectiveness of psy-
choanalysis led to a massive increase in the research of the 
effectiveness of not only psychoanalysis but of all therapies. 
Thirty years later, Smith & Glass (1977) did a meta-analysis 
that supported the overall effectiveness of therapies across 
treatments and problems. Research also progressed in the 
domain of the “process” of therapy. This research was less 
concerned about which technique “worked the best” and more 
focused on the common factors all psychotherapies contain 
that make them all relatively effective. Though there is much 
support that common factors are more important than tech-
nique in predicting a successful outcome in therapy, this has 
not stopped research to determine “which therapy works best 
for which problems.” This more prescriptive research has led to 
the notion of empirically supported treatments for various prob-
lems. Therapies whose stated treatment outcomes are more 
easily described objectively (e.g., cognitive behavior therapy) 
typically fare better than others (e.g. psychodynamic therapies) 
in these analyses.
9
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
4.  All theories make contributions to understanding problems 
 
Because all theoretical models and treatments seem to ac-
count for some problems in significant ways better than others, 
all theoretical perspectives along with their treatments and 
associated research are alive today. 
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 1  
What Is Abnormal Behavior?
10
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
LESSON 2
Current Perspectives
i. Biomedical model
The biomedical model presumes that (like general paresis) all forms 
of abnormality are best understood as illnesses or diseases.
 A. Causes of problems
1.  Germs: Such as the bacterium causing syphilis and general 
paresis
2.  Genes: Genetic mutations that cause illnesses either directly 
or by creating a biological vulnerability
3. Biochemistry: Imbalances in neurotransmitters 
4. Neuroanatomy: Abnormal brain structures
B.  Treatments 
 
Treatments based on this model are mostly drug therapies that 
either kill the germs or theoretically restore the balance of neu-
rotransmitters that are producing the illness.
C.  Current status 
 
This model is more prominent than other models today largely 
due to the availability of medical treatments, the ease of chemical 
treatment, and the idea that considering people exhibiting  
abnormality to be ill may reduce the stigma often associated  
with abnormality.
ii. Psychodynamic model
This model presumes unconscious psychological processes are responsi-
ble for abnormality.
A. Causes of problems 
1.  In the traditional Freudian sense, abnormality is a compro-
mise between the structures of the personality. Individuals 
have unconscious needs or desires that have been repressed 
because they are unacceptable to the super ego. When too 
much of this instinctual desire is repressed, problems occur 
that symbolically represent these unexpressed desires.
11
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
2.  In more recent terms, abnormality is the result of dissociated 
trauma. Individuals who experience severe emotional traumas 
that overwhelm their ability to handle them “dissociate” (men-
tally compartmentalize) the memory and emotion that would 
otherwise be overwhelming. This dissociated emotion seeks 
expression throughout the person’s life, creating problems 
associated symbolically and experientially with the original 
traumas.
B.  Treatments 
 
With either explanation, treatments focus on making the uncon-
scious conscious, or, as Freud said, “where id is, there shall ego 
be” (Freud, 1953), either by having the person experience the 
repressed instinctual desires or re-experience the traumas at the 
source of the repression/dissociation. In recent years, these treat-
ments have been implicated in the development of “false memo-
ries” of childhood abuse. Though the legal implications of these 
false memories are recent, the issue of whether memories regained 
in therapy are historically true has been arduously debated since 
Freud’s time.
C.  Current status 
 
The psychodynamic model is not nearly as pervasive in the un-
derstanding and treatment of abnormality as it was in the first 
half of the 20th century. However, psychodynamic explanations of 
problems like dissociative, somatoform, and personality disorders 
remain important, and similar explanations for other disorders, such 
as mood and anxiety disorders, are still relevant.
iii. Existential–humanistic model
A.  General 
 
These models hold that each individual has his/her own idiosyn-
cratic experience of the world and that each person lives his/her life 
“as if” (Vaihinger, 1925) that experience is reality. There are many 
experiences of reality, and, therefore, there is no universal or cultur-
ally agreed-upon view that specific behaviors are a problem.
12
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
B.  Causes of problems 
 
Humanistic theories discuss this basic experience as based on 
a force of self-actualization that is an “instinctual drive to maintain 
and enhance the organism” (Rogers, 1951). They hold that abnor-
mality is caused when an individual makes choices in life based on 
being accepted and approved of by significant others, rather than 
basing those choices on their own experience. Rather than taking 
responsibility for their own life course, abnormal individuals blame 
other people or external factors for their unhappiness and poor 
choices. This discrepancy is referred to as incongruence or inau-
thenticity. Additionally, abnormality can be caused when a person’s 
life loses a sense of meaning based on the person’s own experi-
ence (Frankl, 1958). 
C.  Treatments 
 
Treatments focus on providing “empathy, genuineness and uncon-
ditional positive regard” so a person develops self-regard and can 
therefore learn to trust his/her own experience and develop his/her 
own sense of meaning. Rather than having their choices based on 
what will be most acceptable to others, people will then live their 
lives based on their own experience (authentic living). 
D.  Current status 
 
This model is the least scientific of all the theoretical models and 
is thus the most prone to criticism. One of the major problems for 
supporters of this model has been finding a way of operationaliz-
ing concepts such as “experience” in a way that can be measured. 
In spite of this major problem, “current status” remains a legiti-
mate model because it seems to explain some common problems 
(depression, anxiety, low self-esteem) in a way that seems most 
meaningful to many (Comer, 2014). Additionally, treatments based 
on this model have been successfully applied as an aspect of most 
all forms of psychotherapy. 
13
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
iV. Cognitive–behavioral model
 A.  General 
 
This model combines the traditional behavioral model with the 
cognitive model. 
B. Causes of problems 
1.  The behavioral model views abnormal behavior the same 
way it views any other behavior, as being determined by the 
environment via classical and operant conditioning. Problems 
are not viewed as symptoms of some other more basic difficul-
ty, but as problems in and of themselves.
2.  The cognitive model is based on a view similar to that of  
the philosopher Epictetus (84 AD), who said men are not  
disturbed by things, but by the way they think of them. In  
this view, it is irrational and/or maladaptive thinking that  
creates abnormality. This thinking can be in the form of  
more short-term cognitions such as expectations, appraisals, 
attributions or more long-term cognitions such as beliefs or  
life philosophies. 
3.  The social cognitive model is based largely on Bandura’s 
work in observational learning and social cognitive theory and 
was one of the major efforts to unite and expand upon the 
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. His idea is that behav-
ior (abnormal and otherwise) is reciprocally determined by 
combinations of environment, behavior, and person variables 
that are mostly cognitive in nature. The idea of reciprocal 
determinism along with concepts such as self-regulation and 
self-efficacy have led to many advances in the understanding 
and treatment of abnormality.
C. Treatments
1.  Behavioral: Treatment of problems involves extinguishing  
unwanted behaviors and shaping and reinforcing desired  
behaviors via classical and operant conditioning.
2.  Cognitive: Treatment of problems involves exposing the  
maladaptive and irrational patterns of thinking and replacing 
them with “the ironclad logic of rational thinking” (Ellis, Harper, 
& Powers, 1975).
3.  Social cognitive: Treatments include modeling, building  
self-efficacy, and facilitating self-regulation of behavior.
14
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
D.  Current status  
 
The cognitive–behavioral perspective has many strengths. Among 
these are its basis in rigorous experimental science and the fact 
that therapies based on this theoretical model are relatively eco-
nomical and very successful. For many of the most prevalent sorts 
of human problems (depression and anxiety disorders), cognitive 
behavior therapy has been shown to be as effective or superior to 
other forms of treatment (e.g., Hollon & Ponniah, 2010). 
V. Sociocultural model
 A.  General 
 
The sociocultural model looks at how greater sociological forces 
such as institutions, economies, and cultures shape individuals’ 
behaviors, including their problems.
B.  Causes of problems  
 
The sociocultural model contends that individual problems are 
caused by the larger systems in which the individual is living. Ac-
cording to this model, nothing is wrong with the individual, per se. 
Abnormality is an outcome of an individual’s living within systems 
that create problems. Individual problems are produced by fac-
tors such as poor family communication, racism, poverty, societal 
change, oppression, and dysfunctional institutions such as schools, 
governments, housing, churches, etc. 
C.  Treatment 
 
Because the source of individual problems is beyond the individual 
level, individual therapy is of little use. Treatment from this perspec-
tive involves family therapies, work to eliminate societal ills such as 
poverty and racism, or initiatives to change how institutions such as 
schools and governments operate.
D.  Current status 
 
The main strength of this model is that it is the only theoretical 
model to view societal and cultural factors as causes of abnormal-
ity in and of themselves. The problems with this view are that it is 
based too heavily on case studies and epidemiological studies,  
and it does not explain well why only a minority of individuals living 
within the same problematic system develop abnormally. 
15
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Vi. Meta-theoretical models
A.  General 
 
Meta-theoretical models allow for research within all theoretical 
models to fit into the overall understanding and treatment of abnor-
mality. Because psychological problems are complex, and because 
all theoretical models make substantial contributions to our under-
standing of problems, these meta-theoretical models are gaining in 
popularity. Two of the most prominent of them are the biopsychoso-
cial model and the diathesis-stress model.
B.  The biopsychosocial model suggests significant biological,  
psychological, and sociocultural factors are involved in the  
development and maintenance of abnormality. Though the relative 
role played by each set of factors may be more or less, depending  
on the problem and the individual, none of these factors should  
be overlooked when someone is trying to understand a  
person’s problems.
16
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
C.  The diathesis-stress model states that different biological factors 
produce a vulnerability to different forms of abnormality (diathesis) 
and that disorders develop when an individual experiences envi-
ronmental stress exceeding that threshold of vulnerability.
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 2.1  
Psychological Disorders and Perspectives in Psychology
Vii. Stigma and abnormal behavior 
Stigma is when individuals with a certain characteristic or attribute become 
discredited and/or rejected by society as a result of that characteristic or 
attribute. When individuals’ behaviors become classified as “mental disor-
ders,” this classification often discredits the individuals in the eyes of soci-
ety and leads to their being rejected as individuals.
A.  How does stigma relate to psychological problems? 
 
An individual’s abnormality or “having a mental disorder” or being 
“mentally ill” or “crazy,” etc., can be one of those attributes that af-
fects others’ perception of that individual as well as the individual’s 
own self-schema and can lead to rejection by those considered to 
not “have a mental disorder.” One’s cultural or ethnic background 
plays a major role in the stigmatization of mental illness and seek-
ing help (e.g., African American, Latino/a, and Asian populations).
 B.  Consequences of having a problem classified 
 
Being labeled with a mental disorder can affect how individuals 
view themselves and how others view them. Through social cogni-
tive processes such as confirmation bias (Wason, 1960), self-serv-
ing bias (Miller, D. T., & Ross, 1975), and self-fulfilling prophecy 
(Merton, 1957), individuals can come to act more like the label that 
has been used to describe their problems.
17
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
 C. Examples of uncovering and dealing with stigmas 
1.  Rosenhan’s (1973) classic study “On Being Sane in Insane 
Places” supports how these processes occur even within pro-
fessional mental health service communities.
2.  One of the critiques of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(discussed more in depth later) is that its categorical system 
of classification promotes applying categorical descriptions to 
individuals that promote the labeling and stigmatizing of peo-
ple exhibiting mental disorders.
3.  Throughout history different sorts of efforts have been made to 
eliminate the stigmatic nature of diagnostic labels. One exam-
ple is the viewing of everyone as mad in one way or another 
(Porter, 2003). The idea of the “wise fool” was another (Porter, 
2003). Currently, groups such as “Mad Pride” encourage indi-
viduals to take pride in their madness and promote a removal 
of the stigmas associated with it.
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 2.2  
On Being Sane in Insane Places 
Viii. Prevalence of mental disorders 
A.  According to the World Health Organization, more than 450 million 
people exhibit some sort of mental disorder. 
B.  The 12-month prevalence rate of mental disorders of all kinds for 
adults in the U.S. is 26.2%. The comparative figure in Europe is 
27%. 
C.  The 12-month prevalence rate of mental disorders of all kinds for 
children in the U.S. is 13.1% (8.6% classified as ADHD).
D.  In 2007, there were about 35,000 suicides in the U.S. About 95% 
of these suicides were committed by individuals age 19 and over 
(CDC statistics).
18
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
iX. Financial impact of mental disorders
A.  Mental illness is the leading cause of disability in children  
(Whitaker, 2010).
B.  Mental disorders constitute more than 28% of the burden of dis-
ability in the U.S. and Canada (WHO statistics).
C.  Expenditures for mental disorders constitute 6.2% of all health 
care expenditures ($100 billion in 2002) (NIMH statistics).
 D.  The average amount spent for mental health care in the U.S. is 
about $1,500 per person (NIMH statistics).
19
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
LESSON 3
Classification of  
Psychological Disorders
I. Classification systems
The DSM-5 is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(Fifth Edition) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). It is currently the 
most common means of classifying mental disorders used in the United 
States and, along with the International Classification of Diseases, 10th 
Revision (ICD-10) (World Health Organization, 1992), one of the most 
widely used classification systems for mental disorders around the world.
A.  Contents of DSM 
 
The DSM-5 contains diagnostic criteria and codes for 19 specific 
categories of mental disorders and additional codes for conditions 
(often called V-codes) that may be a focus of clinical attention not 
considered mental disorders. These would include problems such 
as sibling relational problems, religious or spiritual problems, or 
extreme poverty.
B.  Organization of DSM 
 
The categories of the DSM are laid out in a general developmental 
fashion, with categories of disorders typically seen early in the  
lifespan described first, and those usually expressed later in the 
lifespan later. Likewise, disorders within categories are also pre-
sented in a somewhat developmental sequence.
C.  The International Classification of Diseases 
 
The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is published by 
the World Health Organization. This manual is the most commonly 
used system for the classification of all diseases. It has a chapter 
devoted to the classification of mental and behavioral disorders. 
The current DSM uses coding from the current ICD-9-CM and the 
upcoming ICD-10-CM, and it has an organizational structure that 
reflects the anticipated structure of the ICD-11, due to be published 
sometime in 2017. Though the DSM and ICD organizational sys-
tems are not identical, there is and will continue to be a great deal 
of correspondence between the two systems. 
20
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
II. Understanding classification
The classification of problems is difficult because the ways humans may 
experience and express problems are nearly limitless. Thus, classification 
provides descriptions of the most common ways humans express prob-
lems. These descriptions are best understood as prototypes (best exam-
ples of problems). 
iii. Criticisms of the DSM
A. Biomedical orientation 
 
There are many criticisms of the DSM as a classification tool. First 
among them is that the system is based on a biomedical model of 
problems (e.g., the term diagnostic). 
B.  Categorical vs. dimensional 
 
Another major criticism concerns the categorical nature of classi-
fication. Though in reality individual problems are best described 
dimensionally (more or less) (Markon, Chmielewski, & Miller, 2011), 
the DSM is a categorical system (in or out). This categorical sys-
tem is maintained because it is a traditional form of classification 
in medicine and because it is easier for clinicians to understand 
and use (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Widiger & Shea, 
1991). 
 
The categorical nature of the DSM tends to increase inter-rater 
reliability, but is more questionable with regard to issues of validity. 
Further, it creates problems such as reification of the categories 
(making the categories seem like real entities), exacerbates prob-
lems such as secondary labeling, and increases the likelihood that 
a diagnostic label becomes integrated into the schemas of others 
and an individual’s own self-schema becomes stigmatic.  
 
Categories are descriptions of problems and not explanations 
for them. For example, bulimia nervosa describes a problem in 
which an individual binge eats and is involved in compensatory 
behavior. It does not mean that a person acts that way because 
of bulimia nervosa. Psychological disorders are complex and (as 
outlined previously) are explained in different ways by various theo-
retical approaches.
21
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
C.  Modifications 
 
The DSM-5 attempts to address some of these issues by incorpo-
rating more dimensional aspects. This has been done in a variety 
of ways, for example by broadening some categories of disorders 
(e.g., autism spectrum disorder) and allowing for coding of sever-
ity of many problems along with the use of specifiers (e.g., major 
depressive disorder). Despite these additions, the DSM has essen-
tially maintained its categorical nature (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013).
IV.  Important things to remember about the classification of 
psychological problems
A.  Psychological disorders are classified only if the problems interfere 
with the person’s life in some “clinically significant” (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2013) way. Typically, a mental health profes-
sional determines this clinical significance based on the degree of 
the individual’s suffering and/or the reports of others close to the 
individual. 
B.  Psychological problems are complex and have biological, psycho-
logical, and sociocultural aspects. Thus, questions like “Is schizo-
phrenia genetic?” denote an oversimplification of the complexities 
of the problems that together are known as schizophrenia.
C.  Problems exist at different levels of severity, and the combinations 
of factors that might produce a problem for one person could  
be different from the factors that might produce similar problems  
in others. 
D.  There are also different factors that influence an individual’s expe-
rience of psychological disorders.
1. The American Psychiatric Association (2013) makes it clear 
that psychological disorders “are defined in relation to culture, 
social and familial norms and values” (p. 14). Thus, it is im-
portant to understand the particular cultural background of an 
individual to understand the type and severity of the problem 
a person may be experiencing. Matsumoto & van de Vijver’s 
(2011) description of “multicultural psychology” in part ad-
dresses the need to understand the impact culture may have 
on all behavior, including psychological disorders.
2. Additionally, people’s different ages, cultural/ethnic back-
grounds, and sexual orientation can relate to issues of mental 
health. 
22
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
3. Factors such as culture and gender can have an impact on 
the way individuals experience problems. For example, a 
person’s particular culture can influence how that person 
exhibits the problems they do. Examples of this may be the 
increase in numbers of people exhibiting dissociative identity 
disorders, eating disorders, or attention-deficit hyperactivi-
ty disorders in the United States (e.g. Hacking, 1999; Toro, 
et. al., 2005) or the existence of even more culture-specific 
disorders such as susto. Susto is an anxiety disorder found 
among people in Central and South America that is suppos-
edly caused by having contact with supernatural beings or 
being the victim of black magic (Tan, 1980). It is important 
to remember that culture and gender are not specific single 
causes of psychological problems, but they can play a role in 
the development, experience, and expression of psychologi-
cal disorders (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
4. Social relationships and support have been shown to be 
protective factors against the development of psychological 
disorders (Cobb, 1976) and in the treatment of psychological 
disorders (Bryant, 2010). 
23
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
LESSON 4
Psychological Disorders
i. Anxiety disorders
An underlying issue with all anxiety disorders is a normal fear response 
gone awry. Anxiety disorders are classified when the fear response trig-
gered is out of proportion to the reality of the danger of a situation. Typical-
ly, individuals who experience this anxiety understand their fear is irrational 
but have a difficult time controlling this response. This irrational fear often 
leads to avoidance of situations or objects that interrupts a person’s life in 
a significant way.
A. Examples of anxiety disorders
1.  Specific phobia is an irrational fear of some specific object 
or situation.
2. Agoraphobia is literally “fear of the marketplace”; this is 
a person’s fear of being out in some situation away from 
safety and being unable to escape should they experience 
overwhelming panic or in some other way become suddenly 
incapacitated. 
3. Social anxiety is fear of being humiliated in front of others in 
one or more social situations.
4. Panic disorder is the experience of a sudden severe fear 
response in the absence of any sort of realistic threat. These 
“panic attacks” occur suddenly, are of brief duration, can be 
incapacitating, and lead to worry about experiencing more of 
them.
5. Generalized anxiety disorder is being worried and fearful 
of many different things, including health, finances, weather, 
family, etc. The worry is persistent and interferes significantly 
with the person’s life.
B. Causes of anxiety disorders
1. Psychological: Classically conditioned fear responses and neg-
atively reinforced avoidance (or other fear reducing) behaviors; 
irrational thinking, low self-efficacy, irrational appraisals, fear of 
negative evaluation, anxious apprehension; unresolved uncon-
scious conflicts or traumas; incongruence, inauthenticity
24
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
2. Biological: Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) inactivity; dys-
functional amygdala-hypothalamus-central grey matter-locus 
ceruleus circuit (Comer, 2014)
ii. Obsessive–compulsive and related disorders
A.  Examples of obsessive–compulsive and related disorders
1. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: The key aspects of this 
disorder are repetitive thoughts; images or impulses that 
are unwelcome, produce anxiety, and are difficult to control 
(obsessions); and repetitive and often meaningless behaviors 
that are also difficult to control and that reduce anxiety asso-
ciated with the obsessions (compulsions). 
2. Hoarding disorder: A person with this disorder has per-
sistent difficulty discarding possessions, regardless of their 
actual value, that leads to an accumulation of items that inter-
fere with functioning.
3. Body dysmorphic disorder:  This is a person’s preoccupa-
tion with a perceived defect or flaw in physical appearance 
that seems insignificant to others. The person responds to 
this preoccupation by performing repetitive behaviors (such 
as checking, grooming, or comparing themselves to others).
B.  Causes of obsessive–compulsive and related disorders
1. Psychological: Negative reinforcement of compulsive behav-
iors (for example, washing hands repeatedly is negatively 
reinforcing since it removes the anxiety of thinking about 
germs); ego-defense mechanisms of isolation, undoing, and 
reaction formation; irrational and negative thinking regarding 
undesired thoughts
2. Biological: Overactive orbitofrontal cortex-caudate nuclei-tha-
lamic circuit 
 
Serotonin, glutamate, and dopamine appear to be the neu-
rotransmitters most correlated with these disorders.
iii. Depressive disorders
A. Examples of depressive disorders
1. Major depressive disorder (MDD): Sad mood, loss of plea-
sure in activities, feelings of worthlessness, sleeping difficul-
ties, lack of motivation lasting at least 2 weeks (This disorder 
25
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
tends to be recurrent. Rather than being separate diagnostic 
entities, aspects of this disorder such as “with peripartum 
onset” and “with seasonal pattern” are now used as specifiers 
in the coding of major depressive disorder. )
2. Persistent depressive disorder (PDD, formerly dysthy-
mia): Chronic depressive symptoms that have been experi-
enced for at least 2 years (Because criteria for MDD are not 
contained in PDD, it is possible for someone to be classified 
as exhibiting both disorders.)
3. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Significant mood swings 
or depressive symptoms that occur in the week prior to the 
onset of menses and are greatly reduced or absent in the 
week postmenses
 B. Causes of depressive disorders
1. Psychological: Negative schemas for self, ongoing experi-
ence, and future (cognitive triad); lack of reinforcement; re-
gression and introjection after actual or symbolic loss of loved 
one; loss of meaning; incongruence
2. Biological: Some sort of dysfunction of a neurological circuit 
that includes the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, amygda-
la, and Brodmann Area 25 (This circuit is rich in serotonin. 
Abnormal serotonin gene has been targeted as a potential 
predisposing factor.)
iV. Bipolar and related disorders
A. Examples of bipolar disorders
1. Bipolar disorder: For a person to be classified as exhibiting 
this disorder, the person must have exhibited a manic epi-
sode. A manic episode is characterized by persistently elevat-
ed, expansive, or irritable mood and includes such problems 
as inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, flight of 
ideas, and distractibility that lasts for at least 1 week. 
2. Manic episodes may include hallucinations and delusions. 
Depressive episodes may or may not be present. 
26
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
B. Causes of bipolar disorder
1. Psychological: Manic-defense hypothesis—underlying pro-
cesses similar to depression, but person denies and defends 
against them by acting in a manic way, perhaps due to need 
for approval by others
2.  Biological: May be related somewhat to norepinephrine, sero-
tonin, or GABA; abnormal ion activity within neurons; abnor-
mal basal ganglia and cerebellum (Genes seem to play some 
role in creating vulnerability to these problems.)
V.  Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders
A.  Examples of schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders
1.  Schizophrenia: Schizophrenia consists of several problems 
associated with several psychological processes including 
delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disor-
ganized behavior, and negative symptoms. These problems 
must persist for at least 6 months and be a significant nega-
tive change in the person’s functioning.
2. Delusional disorder: The presence of one or more delu-
sions (false beliefs a person holds in spite of evidence to the 
contrary and in spite of what others believe) (These delusions 
may be described in many ways, including erotomanic, gran-
diose, jealous, persecutory, or somatic. )
B.  Causes of schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders
1. Psychological: External-personal attributions for negative 
events, operant conditioning of peculiar behaviors, attempting 
to make sense out of peculiar perceptual experiences, family 
stress and dysfunction
2.  Biological: Biochemical abnormalities (dopamine and perhaps 
serotonin); abnormalities in frontal and temporal lobes and 
in brain structures such as the hippocampus, amygdala, and 
thalamus
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 4  
An Assignment With Vignettes
27
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
LESSON 5
Psychological Disorders, Continued
i. Personality disorders
Personality disorders involve life-long patterns of maladaptive cognitions, 
thoughts, and behaviors that are both consistent (similar across situations) 
and stable (similar over time). These maladaptive patterns of behavior 
begin in childhood or early adolescence.
A. Examples of personality disorders
1. Antisocial personality disorder (includes problems also 
known as psychopathy and sociopathy): A pattern of disre-
garding and violating the rights of others that includes such 
problems as deceitfulness, impulsivity, aggressive behavior, 
recklessness, lack of conscience, irresponsibility, viewing others 
as prey
2.  Borderline personality disorder: Instability with regard to 
identity, mood, relationships and includes problems such as 
impulsivity, feelings of emptiness, suicidal ideation, self-injuri-
ous behaviors
B. Causes of personality disorders
1. Psychological: Mistreatment in childhood and failure to es-
tablish positive loving relationships with parents, childhood 
trauma, lack of empathy, operant and classical conditioning, 
failure to learn from punishment, modeling, irrational beliefs, 
nonadaptive attributions
2. Biological: Genetic predispositions for maladaptive personality 
traits, slow autonomic arousal, abnormal frontal lobe activity
ii. Trauma and stressor-related disorders
A.  Examples of trauma and stressor-related disorders
1. Posttraumatic stress disorder: A maladaptive reaction to 
actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence 
characterized by problems such as recurrent intrusive mem-
ories of the event, flashbacks, fear of stimuli associated with 
the event, negative changes in mood and ability to concen-
trate, irritability, and feelings of detachment
28
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
2. Adjustment disorder: A person’s development of emotional 
or behavioral problems within 3 months after experiencing a 
stressful event
B.  Causes of trauma and stress-related disorders
1. Psychological: Negative appraisals, fatalistic beliefs, appre-
hension, early childhood traumas, lack of social support, poor 
coping skills, low efficacy, limited self-capacities
2. Biological: Abnormal activity of cortisol and norepinephrine; 
abnormal activity in a circuit involving the hypothalamus and 
amygdala
iii.  Dissociative and somatic symptom disorders
A.  Examples of dissociative and somatic symptom disorders
1. Dissociative identity disorder (formerly multiple person-
ality disorder): Presence of two or more distinct personality 
states, each present at different times and having their own 
cognitions, affect, and behavior
2. Somatic symptom disorder: Experiencing of somatic 
symptoms that are distressing and/or result in disruption of a 
person’s life
3. illness anxiety disorder: Preoccupation with having or ac-
quiring a specific illness, without experiencing somatic symp-
toms
4. Conversion disorder: Physical symptoms resulting in the 
loss of functioning not due to physical causes
5.  Factitious disorder (formerly Munchausen’s syndrome): 
Production of physical problems for the purpose of receiving 
medical attention
B. Causes of dissociative and somatic symptom disorders
1. Psychological: Keeping internal conflicts out of awareness 
(primary gain) and removing self from aversive events/activ-
ities (secondary gain), suggestion, self-hypnosis, repression 
of traumatic events, state-dependent learning
2. Biological: Some unspecified neurological predisposition
29
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
iV. Feeding and eating disorders
A. Examples of feeding and eating disorders
1. Anorexia nervosa: Refusal to maintain minimally normal 
body weight accompanied by an irrational fear of becoming 
obese
2. Bulimia nervosa: Binge eating accompanied by compensa-
tory behavior that is either purging or nonpurging in nature
3. Binge-eating disorder: Binge eating without compensatory 
behavior
B. Causes of feeding and eating disorders
1. Psychological: Ego-deficiencies, perceptual disturbances, 
irrational beliefs, cognitive distortions
2. Biological: Dysfunctional hypothalamus
3. Sociological: Unreasonable societal standards, family envi-
ronment, and communication
V. Neurodevelopmental disorders
These are disorders that develop early in the lifespan and are most often 
classified early in childhood.
A. Examples of neurodevelopmental disorders
1.  intellectual disability (formerly mental retardation): Intel-
lectual and adaptive functioning deficits
2. Autism spectrum disorder (this disorder now includes 
what was formerly Asperger’s disorder): Significant prob-
lems with social communication and social interaction across 
many different social situations; small numbers of interests 
and activities
3. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Significant and 
consistent pattern of inattention and impulsive behavior. This 
may be primarily an inattention problem, a hyperactivity/im-
pulsivity problem, or a combination of both.
B. Causes of neurodevelopmental disorders
1. Psychological: Operant and classical conditioning, modeling, 
failure of self-regulatory systems, high levels of stress, family 
dysfunction, failure to develop a theory of mind
30
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
2. Biological: Neurotransmitter dysfunction (dopamine) in 
ADHD; genetic predispositions; abnormal frontal-striatal 
areas of the brain; prenatal difficulties; abnormalities in the 
brain such as in the limbic system, cerebellum, brain stem 
nuclei, frontal and temporal lobes
Vi.  Substance-related and addictive disorders
Substance-related disorders involve the persistent maladaptive use of (a) 
specific substance(s). All disorders are substance-specific.
A.  Examples of substance related and addictive disorders
1. Alcohol use disorder: Problematic use of alcohol indicated 
by behaviors such as craving, social problems, interference 
with work/school responsibilities, inability to stop using, phys-
ical problems
2. Gambling disorder: Problematic gambling behavior that 
leads to significant disruption of the person’s life
B.  Causes of substance-related and addictive disorders
1.  Psychological: Operant and classical conditioning, modeling, 
stress, trauma, low efficacy, lack of coping skills, impulsivity
2.  Biological: Genetic predisposition, abnormal GABA receptors, 
reward-deficiency syndrome
3.  Sociocultural: Poverty, unemployment; dysfunctional families; 
societal value placed on substance use; availability
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 5.1  
Connecting Media and Psychology
 
  
 GO TO ACTIVITY 5.2  
Interesting Psychology Information
 
31
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
ACTIVITIES
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
ACTIVITY 1
What is Abnormal Behavior?
From original TOPSS unit lesson plan
Procedure
This activity can be used to introduce the idea of abnormal psychology.
Ask students to individually write down three criteria they believe could be 
used to define abnormal behavior. Tell them they will be using their crite-
ria to determine the relative mental health of the student described in the 
case study (below) you are going to give them. Provide them time to think 
critically about the case. Suggest the students use the prompt “Behavior 
might be considered psychologically disordered if it is ...”
Discussion
First, ask students to contribute ideas about psychologically disordered 
behavior. Write their ideas on the board or overhead with the goal of try-
ing to develop some sort of class consensus. Your goal is to illustrate how 
difficult it is for us to agree on a workable definition of psychologically 
ACTIVITIES
32
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
disordered. As you cluster contributions from students, try to establish the 
general definition as follows.
Most accepted definitions of abnormality include the ideas of deviance, 
distress, dysfunction, and dangerousness (Comer, 2014). 
Ask students if all these criteria should be involved to determine whether a 
behavior is psychologically disordered.
Second, distribute the case study (see below). Ask students to read it 
silently, then discuss with a partner whether or not Anne should be thought 
of as psychologically disordered. Opinions will differ. Ask several pairs to 
share their conclusions with the class and to support their position. Point 
out that behaving differently does not necessarily indicate poor mental 
health; we also need more information about Anne to make an informed 
decision. Students should come to understand the difficulties of determin-
ing abnormal behavior.
Finally, point out that the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association, along with the Interna-
tional Classification of Diseases, is an attempt to carefully categorize and 
describe mental disorders. DSM-5 is used by psychologists and psychia-
trists to do professionally what the students have attempted to do in this 
activity.
A Case Study
Anne is a 16-year-old girl living in a medium-sized city in the Midwest. Her 
family includes a mother, father, 14-year-old brother, and a great-aunt, 
who has lived with the family since Anne was 4. Anne is a junior at City 
High School and is taking a college-preparatory program. Her appearance 
is strikingly different from the appearance of the other girls in her class. 
She wears blouses which she has made out of various scraps of material. 
The blouses are accompanied by the same pair of overalls every day, two 
mismatched shoes, and a hat with a blue feather. She is a talented artist, 
producing sketches of her fellow classmates that are remarkably accurate. 
She draws constantly, even when told that to do so will lower her grade in 
classes where she is expected to take lecture notes.
She has no friends at school, but seems undisturbed by the fact that she 
eats lunch by herself and walks alone around the campus. Her grades 
are erratic; if she likes a class she often receives an A or B, but will do no 
work at all in those she dislikes. Anne can occasionally be heard talking 
to herself; she is interested in poetry and says she is “composing” if asked 
about her poetry. She refuses to watch television, calling it a “wasteland.” 
33
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
This belief is carried into the classroom, where she refuses to watch 
videotapes, saying they are poor excuses for teaching. Her parents say 
they don’t understand her; she isn’t like anyone in their family. She and her 
brother have very little in common. He is embarrassed by Anne’s behavior 
and doesn’t understand her either. Anne seems blithely unaware of her 
apparent isolation, except for occasional outbursts about the meaningless-
ness of most people’s activities. 
34
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
ACTIVITY 2.1
Psychological Disorders and  
Perspectives in Psychology
Developed by
Scott Reed, MEd 
Hamilton High School, Chandler, AZ
Review the diagnostic criteria of a particular disorder in the DSM. Select 
one of the criteria and relate the behavior to the different perspectives in 
psychology. Consider the course of the disorder including the onset, main-
tenance, and/or treatment. 
Some possible disorders to consider: depression, alcohol use disorder, 
phobias, generalized anxiety, schizophrenia, obsessive–compulsive disor-
der, eating disorders, bipolar disorder, posttraumatic stress, or another of 
your choice.
Try to relate to these perspectives:
• 
Biomedical
• 
Psychodynamic
• 
Cognitive
• 
Behavioral 
• 
Humanistic
• 
Sociocultural 
 
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
35
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
ACTIVITY 2.2
On Being Sane in insane Places
Developed by
Nancy Diehl, PhD 
Hong Kong International School, Tai Tam, Hong Kong
The purpose of this activity is to further understand issues related to defin-
ing psychological disorders in context, considering aspects of labeling and 
treatment, using Rosenhan’s classic study as a backdrop. This also ad-
dresses contemporary issues of making a referral. Students should work in 
small groups of five to seven. 
Part 1 
Students read the original or a summary of Rosenhan’s classic experiment 
(Rosenhan, 1973) “On Being Sane in Insane Places.” 
Part 2
Hold a class discussion. Topics may include: 
• 
Research design including selection of participants
• 
Typical behavior of psychiatric patients
• 
Confirmation bias 
• 
The long-term impact of labeling
• 
Historical context (This may affect categories and labeling in early to 
mid-1970s America. Of note, the publication date of Rosenhan’s work 
is the same year homosexuality was removed from the DSM.)
36
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Part 3
Students discuss the related issue regarding how to refer someone with 
disordered behavior to seek evaluation and/or treatment. Using acronym 
REFER (Van Raalte & Brewer, 2005), discuss each step: 
R—Recognize a referral is needed.
E—Explain the referral process.
F—Focus on feelings.
E—Exit if emotions are too intense.
R—Repeat and follow up as needed.
Discuss effectiveness of a referral attempt as framed above. 
References
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250-258.
Van Raalte, J. L., & Brewer, B. W. (2005). Balancing college, food, and life [CD-ROM]. Wil-
braham, MA: Virtual Brands. (Available from Virtual Brands, 10 Echo Hill Rd., Wilbra-
ham, MA 01095 or http://www.vbvideo.com.)
 
37
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
ACTIVITY 4
An Assignment With Vignettes
Developed by
Scott Reed, MEd 
Hamilton High School, Chandler, AZ
Write a vignette, a short story, about a person who has been diagnosed 
with one of the disorders from the lesson. Include the onset of the disor-
der, how it is affecting the person’s life, and how the person is coping with 
the disorder. 
The students can share the vignettes with class members and see if they 
can identify some of the relevant characteristics of the disorder. Disorders 
may include: agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive–com-
pulsive disorder, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophre-
nia, antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, post-
traumatic stress disorder, dissociative identity disorder, factitious disorder, 
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, autism spectrum disorder, atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
Teachers may want to assign the disorders to ensure more of them are 
covered.
Sources
American Psychological Association 
http://www.apa.org 
National Institute of Mental Health 
http://www.nimh.nih.gov 
 
National Alliance on Mental Illness 
http://www.nami.org 
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
38
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
ACTIVITY 5.1
Connecting Media and Psychology 
Developed by
Judy Van Raalte, PhD 
Springfield College
The purpose of this assignment is to help students to find connections 
between what they experience in their lives and the field of psychology. 
Outcomes may be a class presentation (typically fewer than 5 minutes per 
presentation is most effective) or a paper. This may also be an out-of-class 
assignment. 
Student instructions
(a)  Select a newspaper or magazine article, song lyrics, 
drawrings, or YouTube video that is meaningful or inter-
esting to you relating, in some meaningful way, to a psy-
chological disorder. The article, song, drawing, or video 
you select is your “media source.”
(b)  Re-read or review your media source and type a paper 
or create a presentation in which you first describe your 
media source. What is your media source about? What is 
interesting or meaningful about it? Why did you choose 
this particular media source? Feel free to quote the es-
sential characteristics with proper citations.
(c)  Explain the connection between the media source 
and relevant terms covered in the textbook. Be as de-
tailed as possible. You cannot do this from memory. You 
must be specific about your media source and the text 
terms. Use psychology terms (and underline them) and 
include their definitions. Where possible, consider the 
perspective taken in the article, song, drawing, or video 
(e.g., biomedical, psychodynamic, cognitive, behavioral, 
humanistic, sociocultural).
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
39
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
(d)  Submit your media source (or the web address of your 
source or movie or song lyrics) with the paper or on the 
presentation day.
40
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
ACTIVITY 5.2
interesting Psychology information
Developed by
Judy Van Raalte, PhD 
Springfield College
The purpose of this assignment is to familiarize students with the Ameri-
can Psychological Association, which has a website that provides scientifi-
cally based, interesting, and important info related to psychology, including 
psychological disorders. Students will be directed to the Monitor on Psy-
chology magazine to select an article. 
Student instructions
Go to this website for the Monitor on Psychology monthly magazine pub-
lished by APA: http://www.apa.org/monitor/.
(a)  Select an article to read focused on issues related to 
psychological disorders in general or specifically or 
issues that relate to the diagnosis, care, treatment of 
people with psychological disorders, family or caregiver 
concerns, or more generally regarding the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (it can  
be from a previous issue—see link at the side of the 
webpage).
(b)  Read your article and type a paper in which you first 
summarize the article.
(c)  What is the most important idea in the article? Explain 
your answer. Be as detailed as you can be.
(d)  Explain the connection you see between the most im-
portant idea in the article and concepts in the textbook. 
Be as detailed as possible. Use psychology terms (and 
underline them) and include their definitions. If a topic 
has not yet been covered in class, look it up and read the 
BACK TO 
CONTENT 
OUTLINE
41
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
relevant section(s). Do not limit your connections to the 
chapter on psychological disorders, but make connec-
tions with previous sections on topics such as research 
design, stress, biology of the mind, nature–nurture, etc.
(e)  Submit a hard copy of your article along with your 
paper.
43
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
CRITICAL  
THINKING AND  
DISCUSSION  
QUESTIONS
CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
CRiTiCAL THiNKiNG ON  
PSYCHOLOGiCAL DiSORDERS
Critical Thinking Exercise for Lesson 1
As explained in the unit, defining the term mental disorder is complex. 
Comer (2014) suggested most accepted definitions include the ideas of 
deviance, distress, dysfunction, and dangerousness. Demonstrate your 
understanding by giving one example of a behavior that reflects each “D.” 
How might historical context and culture affect these decisions?
Critical Thinking Exercise for Lesson 2
Consider the perspectives in psychology: psychodynamic, cognitive, 
behavioral, humanistic, sociocultural, and biological. Given what you’ve 
learned thus far, does any one or more perspective(s) resonate with you? 
Which? Why?
What steps can high school students take to lessen the stigma often asso-
ciated with psychological disorders? What steps can be taken by various 
community leaders?
Critical Thinking Exercise for Lesson 3
Personality disorders have been a controversial aspect of the DSM. DSM-
5 described three clusters, with specific disorders falling under each of 
three categories: anxiety related, eccentric, and dramatic/impulsive. In the 
44
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
development of DSM-5, there was much debate about changing these 
categories, but ultimately they remained the same. What are some of the 
challenges categorizing these disorders? What changes do you foresee 
for next DSM edition?
Critical Thinking Exercise for Lesson 4
Apply the learning perspective using concepts in classical conditioning and 
operant conditioning (e.g., unconditioned stimulus, reinforcement, punish-
ment) to describe how a teenager may have developed a school phobia. 
Consider how the reasons for the initial driving force of the behavior may 
be different from the reasons for maintaining the behavior.
Critical Thinking Exercise for Lesson 5
When exposed to trauma, most people do not develop posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). Discuss factors that might influence who develops 
PTSD and who does not.
DiSCUSSiON QUESTiONS
Discussion Questions for Lesson 1
Changes in the treatment of people with abnormal behavior have coin-
cided with social change and medical understanding. What changes do 
you think might happen in the next 10–20 years? How might technological 
advances inform or shift current understanding of abnormality?
There is a much smaller percentage of the population in mental institu-
tions in America since the philosophy of deinstitutionalization started in the 
1970s. Why do you think so many fewer people are now institutionalized? 
What were some of the problems associated with the release of so many 
patients? What are some ways those are being dealt with now?
45
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Discussion Questions for Lesson 2
The biopsychosocial model suggests the interaction of many different 
kinds of factors leads to the development of mental disorders. Describe  
evidence that emphasizes environmental causes for mental disorders.  
Describe evidence for biological causes of mental disorders. How might 
these interact?
What might parents of a child with abnormal behavior consider as  
short-term or long-term effects of labeling? What might parents consider 
as benefits? 
From each of the different perspectives, how do early experiences  
(e.g., significant levels of stress) contribute to likelihood of developing  
a disorder?
Discussion Question for Lesson 3
What are the pros and cons of classifying abnormal behaviors with a sys-
tem such as DSM or ICD? 
Discussion Questions for Lesson 4
In what ways does major depressive disorder differ from “the blues”?
Compare and contrast the biological and behavioral views of anxiety  
disorders and discuss how differences between the two views might  
be reconciled. 
Discussion Questions for Lesson 5
People unfamiliar with the study of abnormal behavior sometimes  
confuse “multiple personality” with schizophrenia. How would you  
explain the differences?
In what ways do personality disorders differ from other psychological  
disorders? In what ways are they similar?
46
47
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
REFERENCES  
AND OTHER  
RESOURCES  
REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES 
REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Andrews, J., Briggs, A., Porter, R., Tucker, P., & Waddington, K. (1997). The history of 
Bethlem. London, UK: Routledge.
Binswanger, L. (1963). Being-in-the-world (translated and with a critical introduction by J. 
Needleman). New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc. 
Bryant, R. A. (2010). Treating the full range of posttraumatic reactions. In G. M. Rosen 
& B. C. Frueh (Eds.), Clinician’s guide to posttraumatic stress disorder (pp. 205-234). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). National suicide statistics at a 
glance.  Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/Violenceprevention/suicide/statistics/index.
html 
Cerletti, U. (1956). Electroshock therapy. In A. M. Sackler, M. D. Sackler, R. R. Sackler, & 
F. Marti-Ibanez (Eds.), The great physiodynamic therapies in psychiatry: An historical 
reappraisal (pp. 91-120). New York, NY: Hoeber-Harper. 
Cobb, S. (1976). Social support as a moderator of life stress. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
38, 300.
Comer, R. J. (2014). Abnormal psychology (8th ed., DSM-5 update). New York, NY: Worth.
Cotton, H. A. (1921). The defective delinquent and insane. Princeton, NJ: Princeton  
University Press.
Ellis, A., Harper, R. A., & Powers, M. (1975). A guide to rational living. Chatsworth, CA: 
Wilshire Book Co.
Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The effects of psychotherapy: An evaluation. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 16, 319-324.
Frankl, V. (1958). On logotherapy and existential analysis. American Journal of  
Psychoanalysis, 18, 28-37. 
Freud, S. (1933). New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. New York, NY: Norton.
48
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Freud, S. (1953). The interpretation of dreams. In Standard edition, Vols. 4 & 5. London, 
UK: Hogarth Press. (First German Edition, 1900).
Hacking, I. (1998). Rewriting the soul: Multiple personality and the sciences of memory. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hollon, S. D., & Ponniah, K. (2010). A review of empirically supported psychological thera-
pies for mood disorders in adults. Depression and Anxiety, 27(10), 891-932.
Kelly, G. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New York, NY: Norton.
Mackay, C. S. (2009). The hammer of witches: A complete translation of the Malleus  
Maleficarum. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Maher, W. B., & Maher, B. A. (1985). Psychopathology: I. From ancient times to the  
eighteenth century. In G. A. Gimble & K. Schlesinger (Eds.), Topics in the history of 
psychology (Vol. 2). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markon, K. E., Chmielewski, M., & Miller, C. J. (2011). The reliability and validity of  
discrete and continuous measures of psychopathology: A quantitative review.  
Psychological Bulletin, 137(5), 856-879.
Miller, D. T., & Ross, M. (1975). Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality: Fact or 
fiction? Psychological Bulletin, 82, 213-225.
Merton, R. (1957). Social theory and social structure. New York, NY: Free Press.
National Institute of Mental Health. (2014). Mental healthcare costs for all Americans 
(1996-2006).  Retrieved from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/4MH_AM9603.shtml 
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reflexes. London, UK: Clarendon Press.
Porter, R. (2003). A brief history of madness. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250-258.
Rosenhan, D. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). Abnormal psychology (3rd ed.). New York, 
NY: Norton.
Sarton, G. (1952). A guide to the history of science. Waltham, MA: Chronica Botanica.
Scull, A. (1993). The most solitary of afflictions: Madness and society in Britain,  
1700-1900. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shorter, E. (1997). A history of psychiatry: From the era of the asylum to the age of 
Prozac.  New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Smith, M. L., & Glass, G. V. (1977). Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. 
American Psychologist, 32(9), 752-760.
Swazey, J. P. (1974). Chlorpromazine in psychiatry: A study of therapeutic intervention. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
49
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
Tan, E. S. (1980). Transcultural aspects of anxiety. In G. D. Burrows & B. Davies (Eds.), 
Handbook of studies on anxiety. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland.
Tierney, A. J. (2000). Egas Moniz and the origins of psychosurgery: A review  
commemorating the 50th anniversary of Moniz’s Nobel Prize. Journal of the  
History of the Neurosciences, 9(1), 22-36.
Tuke, S. (1964). Description of the Retreat, an institution near York. London, UK:  
Process Press.
Vaihinger, H. (1925). The philosophy of “As If’: A system of the theoretical, practical and 
religious fictions of mankind. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace & Company.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task.  
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 12(3), 129-140.
Whitaker, R. (2010). Anatomy of an epidemic: Magic bullets, psychiatric drugs, and the 
astonishing rise of mental illness in America. New York, NY: Crown Publishers.
Widiger, T. A. & Shea, T. (1991). Differentiation of Axis I and Axis II disorders. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 100(3), 399-406.
World Health Organization. (1992). International classification of diseases. Retrieved from 
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/
World Health Organization. (2014). Mental health: First WHO world suicide report.   
Retrieved from http://www.who.int/mental_health/en/ 
OTHER RESOURCES
Barlow, D. H., & Durand, V. M. (2011). Abnormal psychology: An integrative approach 
(6thed.). Belmont, CA: Cengage.
Bentall, R. P. (2009). Doctoring the mind: Why psychiatric treatments fail. London, UK: 
Penguin Books.
Cervone, D., & Pervin, L. A. (2013). Personality: Theory and research (12th ed.).  
New York, NY: Wiley.
Halgin, R. (2012). Taking sides: Clashing views in abnormal psychology (7th ed.).  
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., Jessel, T. M., Siegelbaum, S. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (Eds.). 
(2012). Principles of neural science (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Matsumoto, D., & van de Vijver, F. J. R. (Eds.). (2011). Cross-cultural research methods in 
psychology: Culture and psychology. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Toro, J., Gila, A., Castro, J., Pombo, C., & Guete, O. (2005). Body image, risk factors 
for eating disorders and sociocultural influences in Spanish adolescents. Eating and 
Weight Disorders, 10(2), 91-97.
51
A UNIT LESSON PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY TEACHERS
BACK TO  CONTENTS
AMERICAN
PSYCHO LO G ICAL
ASSO CIATIO N
Copyright © 2014 American Psychological Association.
